Docs styles (#775)
Textualize/textual: docs/guide/styles.md

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/widget.py"}
```

Widgets will occupy the full width of the screen and as many lines as required to fit in the vertical direction.

Note how the combined height of the widget is three rows in the terminal. This is because a border adds two rows (and two columns). If you were to remove the line that sets the border style, the widget would occupy a single row.

Widgets will wrap text by default. If you were to replace `"Textual"` with a long paragraph of text, the widget will expand downwards to fit.

## Colors

There are a number of style attribute which accept colors. The most commonly used are [color](../styles/color.md) which sets the default color of text on a widget, and [background](..styles/background/md) which sets the background color (beneath the text).

You can set a color value to one of a number of pre-defined color constants, such as "crimson", "lime", and "palegreen". You can find a full list in the [Color reference](../reference/color.md#textual.color--named-colors).

> Here's how you would set the screen background to lime:

Reviewer: The text says "screen", and the example shows an arbitrary widget, suggesting:

```suggestion
Here's how you would set the background of a widget to lime:
```

Author: Updated the example. Wanted to stick to screen for now.

```python
widget.styles.background = "lime"
```

In addition to color names, you can also use any of the following ways of expressing a color:

- RGB hex colors starts with a `#` followed by three pairs of one or two hex digits; one for the red, green, and blue color components. For example, `#f00` is an intense red color, and `#9932CC` is *dark orchid*.
- RGB decimal color start with `rgb` followed by a tuple of three numbers in the range 0 to 255. For example `rgb(255,0,0)` is intense red, and `rgb(153,50,204)` is *dark orchid*.
- HSL colors start with `hsl` followed by a angle between 0 and 360 and two percentage values, representing Hue, Saturation and Lightness. For example `hsl(0,100%,50%)` is intense red and `hsl(280,60%,49%)` is *dark orchid*

> The background and color styles will also accept a [color][textual.color.Color] object which can be used to create colors dynamically.

Reviewer: A bit nitpicky:
```suggestion
The background and color styles also accept a [Color][textual.color.Color] object which can be used to create colors dynamically.
```

The following example adds three widgets and sets color styles.

```python title="colors01.py" hl_lines="16-19"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/colors01.py"
```

Here is the output:

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/colors01.py"}
```

### Alpha

Textual represents color internally as a tuple of three values for the red, green, and blue components.

> Textual support a common fourth value called *alpha* which can make a color translucent. If you set alpha on a background color, Textual will blend the background with the color beneath it. If you set alpha on the text color, then Textual will blend the text with the background color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Textual supports a common fourth value called *alpha* which can make a color translucent. If you set alpha on a background color, Textual will blend the background with the color beneath it. If you set alpha on the text color, then Textual will blend the text with the background color.
```

There are a few ways you can set alpha on a color in Textual.

- You can set the alpha value of a color by adding a fourth digit or pair of digits to a hex color. The extra digits form an alpha component which ranges from 0 for completely transparent to 255 (completely opaque). Any value between 0 and 255 will be translucent. For example `"#9932CC7f"` is a dark orchid which is roughly 50% translucent.
- You can also set alpha with the `rgba` format, which is identical to `rgb` with the additional of a fourth value that should be between 0 and 1, where 0 is invisible and 1 is opaque. For example `"rgba(192,78,96,0.5)"`.
- You can add the `a` parameter on a [Color][textual.color.Color] object. For example `Color(192, 78, 96, a=0.5)` creates a translucent dark orchid. 

The following examples shows what happens when you set alpha on background colors:

```python title="colors01.py" hl_lines="12-15"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/colors02.py"
```

Notice that an alpha of 0.1 the background almost matches the screen, but at 1.0 it is a solid color. 

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/colors02.py"}
```

## Dimensions

> Widgets occupy a rectangular region of the screen, which may be as small as a single character or as large as the screen. Potentially *larger* if [scrolling](#) is enabled.

Reviewer: Take it or leave it: "Potentially larger if scrolling is enabled." doesn't sound right to me as a standalone sentence.

```suggestion
Widgets occupy a rectangular region of the screen, which may be as small as a single character or as large as the screen. If [scrolling](#) is enabled, widgets can be even larger than the screen.
```

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions01.py"}
```

Note how the text wraps in the widget, and is cropped because it doesn't fit in the space provided.

#### Auto dimensions

In practice, we generally want the size of a widget to adapt to it's content, which we can do by setting a dimension to `"auto"`.

Let's set the height to auto and see what happens.

```python title="dimensions02.py" hl_lines="22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions02.py"
```

If you run this you will see the height of the widget now grows to accommodate the full text.:

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions02.py"}
```

#### Units

Textual offers a few different *units* which allow you to specify dimensions relative to the screen or container. Relative units can better make use of available space if the user resizes the terminal.

- Percentage units are given as a string containing a number followed by a percentage symbol, e.g. `"50%"`. Setting a dimension to a percentage unit will cause it to fit in that percentage of the available space. For instance, setting width to `"50%"` will cause the width of the widget to be half the available space.

> - View units are similar to percentage units, but explicitly reference a dimension. The `vw` unit sets a dimension to a percentage of the terminal *width*, and `vh` sets a dimension to a percentage of the terminal *height*.

Reviewer: Nicely put

> - The `w` unit sets a dimension to a percentage of the available width (which may be smaller than the terminal size if the widget is within another widget).

Reviewer: Appreciate the text in the brackets here. I was like "but how does that differ from the bullet above" and my question was immediately answered!

- The `h` unit sets a dimension to a percentage of the available height.

The following example demonstrates applying percentage units:

```python title="dimensions03.py" hl_lines="21-22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions03.py"
```

With the width set to `"50%"` and the height set to `"80%"`, the widget will keep those relative dimensions when resizing the terminal window:

=== "60 x 20"

    ```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions03.py" columns="60" lines="20"}
    ```

=== "80 x 30"

    ```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions03.py" columns="80" lines="30"}
    ```

=== "120 x 40"

    ```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions03.py" columns="120" lines="40"}
    ```

> Percentage units are useful for widgets that occupy a relative portion of the screen, but it can be problematic for some proportions. For instance if we want to divide the screen in to thirds, we would have to set a dimension to `33.3333333333%` which is awkward. Textual supports `fr` units which is often better than percentage based units for these situations.

Reviewer: Felt off so Grammarly'd it 😄 take it or leave it:
```suggestion
Percentage units are useful for widgets that occupy a relative portion of the screen, but they can be problematic for some proportions. For instance, if we want to divide the screen into thirds, we would have to set a dimension to `33.3333333333%` which is awkward. Textual supports `fr` units which are often better than percentage-based units for these situations.
```

> When specifying `fr` units for a given dimensions, Textual will divide the available space by the total `fr` units on a dimension. That space will then be divided amongst the widgets as a proportion of their individual `fr` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When specifying `fr` units for a given dimension, Textual will divide the available space by the sum of the `fr` units on that dimension. That space will then be divided amongst the widgets as a proportion of their individual `fr` values.
```

Let's look at an example. We will create two widgets, one with a height of `"2fr"` and one with a height of `"1fr"`.

```python title="dimensions04.py" hl_lines="24-25"

> --8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions02.py"

Reviewer: The wrong code snippet was used here.

```suggestion
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/dimensions04.py"
```

- [max-width](../styles/max_width.md) sets a maximum width.
- [min-height](../styles/min_height.md) sets a minimum height.
- [max-height](../styles/max_hright.md) sets a maximum height.

### Padding

Padding adds space around your content which can aid readability. Setting [padding](../styles/padding.md) to an integer will add that number additional rows and columns around the content area. The following example sets padding to 2:

```python title="padding01.py" hl_lines="22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/padding01.py"
```

Notice the additional space around the text:

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/padding01.py"}
```

You can also set padding to a tuple of two integers which will apply padding to the top/bottom and left/right edges. The following example sets padding to `(2, 4)` which adds two rows to the top and bottom of the widget, and 4 columns to the left and right of the widget.

```python title="padding02.py" hl_lines="22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/padding02.py"
```

Compare the output of this example to the previous example:

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/padding02.py"}
```

> You can also set padding to a tuple of four values which applies padding to each edge individually. The first value it the padding for the top of the widget, followed by the right of the widget, then bottom, then left.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also set padding to a tuple of four values which applies padding to each edge individually. The first value is the padding for the top of the widget, followed by the right of the widget, then bottom, then left.
```

### Border 

The [border](../styles/border.md) style draws a border around a widget. To add a border set `syles.border` to a tuple of two values. The first value is the border type, which should be a string. The second value is the border color which will accept any value that works with  [color](../styles/color.md) and [background](../styles/background.md).

The following example adds a border around a widget:

```python title="border01.py" hl_lines="22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/border01.py"
```

Here is the result:

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/border01.py"}
```

There are many other border types. Run the following from the command prompt to preview them.

```bash
textual borders
```

### Outline

> [Outline](../styles/outline.md) is similar to border and is set in the same way. The difference is that outline will not change the size of the widget, and may overlap the content area. The following examples sets an outline on a widget:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Outline](../styles/outline.md) is similar to border and is set in the same way. The difference is that outline will not change the size of the widget, and may overlap the content area. The following example sets an outline on a widget:
```

```python title="outline01.py" hl_lines="22"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/outline01.py"
```

Notice how the outline overlaps the text in the widget.

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/outline01.py"}
```

Outline can be useful to emphasize a widget, but be mindful that it may obscure your content.

> ### Box sizing

Reviewer: I remember having difficulty grokking the box-sizing description in the styles reference, but this section is great. Very well explained.

When you set padding or border it reduces the size of the widget's content area. In other words, setting padding or border won't change the width or height of the widget.

This is generally desirable when you arrange things on screen as you can add border or padding without breaking your layout. Occasionally though you may want to keep the size of the content area constant and grow the size of the widget to fit padding and border. The [box-sizing](../styles/box_sizing.md) style allows you to switch between these two modes.

> If you set `box_sizing` to `"content-box"` then space required for padding and border will be added to the widget dimensions. The default value of `box_sizing` is `"border-box"`. Compare the box model diagram for content box to the previous box model diagram.

Reviewer: Only thing I'd say here is "the previous box model diagram" is so far back up the page I'd almost forgotten about it.
When I read this my instinct is to want to compare them. I'd probably like to see both of them side by side, or at least in tabs that I can click between instead of having to scroll away back up to spot the difference.

Author: I'll add a link

<div class="excalidraw">
--8<-- "docs/images/styles/content_box.excalidraw.svg"
</div>

The following example creates two widgets which have a width of 30, a height of 6, and a border and padding of 1. The second widget has `box_sizing` set to `"content-box"`.

```python title="box_sizing01.py" hl_lines="33"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/box_sizing01.py"
```

The padding and border of the first widget is subtracted from the height leaving only 2 lines in the content area. The second widget also has a height of 6, but the padding and border adds additional height so that the content area remains 6 lines. 

> ```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/box_sizing01.py"}

Reviewer: Aside/suggestion: The code snippet here:
```python
        self.widget1.styles.background = "purple"
        self.widget2.styles.background = "darkgreen"
        self.widget1.styles.width = 30
        self.widget2.styles.width = 30
        self.widget2.styles.height = 6
        self.widget1.styles.height = 6
        self.widget2.styles.height = 6
        self.widget1.styles.border = ("heavy", "white")
        self.widget2.styles.border = ("heavy", "white")
        self.widget1.styles.padding = 1
        self.widget2.styles.padding = 1
        self.widget2.styles.box_sizing = "content-box"
```

Makes me wish for an API like:

```python
self.widget1.styles.update(
    background="purple",
    width=30,
    height=6,
    padding=1,
)
```

Inline styles are definitely more verbose than they need to be atm, which is good for selling CSS, but I think both stories can be great 😄

```

### Margin

Margin is similar to padding in that it adds space, but unlike padding, [margin](../styles/margin.md) is outside of the widget's border. It is used to add space between widgets.

The following example creates two widgets, each with a padding of 2.

```python title="margin01.py" hl_lines="33"
--8<-- "docs/examples/guide/styles/margin01.py"
```

Notice how each widget has an additional two rows and columns around the border.

```{.textual path="docs/examples/guide/styles/margin01.py"}
```

!!! note

>     In the above example both widgets have a margin of 2, but there are only 2 lines of space between the widgets. This is because margins of consecutive widgets *overlap*. In other words when there are two widgets next to each other Textual picks the greater of the two margins.

Reviewer: Slightly embarrassed to admit I didn't know this 😄
